---
title: 'Implementing Rendering Interpolation in Pulcher'
date: 2021-01-17
permalink: /posts/2021/01/post/
---

Here I introduce how rendering interpolation is done in Core of Pulcher. It's
nothing novel, but I haven't really seen anything written up about this for 2D
so I thought I might as well document it. Pulcher runs at a specified logical
framerate, right now 90hz but I probably will set it to something lower in the
future. The loop is simple and looks like

```
    // -- update windowing events
    glfwPollEvents();

    // -- logic, 90 Hz
    msToCalculate += deltaMs;
    size_t calculatedFrames = 0ul;
    while (msToCalculate >= sceneBundle.calculatedMsPerFrame) {
      // -- process logic
      ++ calculatedFrames;
      msToCalculate -= sceneBundle.calculatedMsPerFrame;
      ::ProcessLogic(plugin, sceneBundle);

      // -- update render bundle
      renderBundle.Update(sceneBundle);
    }

    sceneBundle.numCpuFrames = calculatedFrames;

    // -- rendering / audio
    ...
```

For reference, while the map is being interpolated, the animation system is not
being interpolated;

[![anim-00](https://img.youtube.com/vi/qJ7eW0IoEkY/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qJ7eW0IoEkY)

Ignore that the animations aren't textured; as part of updating my rendering/animation systtem I haven't gotten to update how textures are being applied.

Now, even though the game runs at 90hz, even on my 240Hz monitor I can notice
that the rendering isn't quite updating enough for my brain to see a fluid
motion. It's difficult to describe but having played a lot of 2D games at high
framerate, I can definitely pick up when framerate is becoming an issue
visually.

The solution to this isn't anything novel - interpolation of the current and
previous logical frame. This introduces a frame of latency, which is
regrettable, but it's preferrable over having a capped rendering framerate.
The alternative is to use a delta-time to calculate logic, and while this
grants fluid motion, I can't imagine it is stable or gives reproducible
results. Maybe I can talk about this choice at a later date though.

The initial step to prepare for interpolation is to copy some subset of data
over from `sceneBundle`, a bundle of information that can be used to retrieve
scene info in Pulcher. This gets copied into `RenderBundleInstance`, tracked by
a `RenderBundle`. The render bundle can then construct `RenderBundleInstance`
from its tracked instances when given a ms-delta interpolation value (from 0 to
1):

```
    struct RenderBundleInstance {
      glm::vec2 playerOrigin;
      glm::vec2 cameraOrigin;

      glm::vec2 playerCenter;

      // allows plugins to query plugin data
      std::map<std::string, std::shared_ptr<pul::util::Any>> pluginBundleData;

      // 0 .. 1, ms delta interpolation. only used from instances created by
      //   RenderBundle::Interpolate
      float msDeltaInterp;
    };

    struct RenderBundle {
      RenderBundleInstance previous, current;

      bool debugUseInterpolation = true;

      // constructs dummy render bundle (previous = current = scene), this is so
      // that the first couple of frames of rendering are valid & do not have
      // garbage memory
      static RenderBundle Construct(
        pul::plugin::Info const & plugin, SceneBundle &
      );

      // stores current into previous, and then updates current with scene
      void Update(pul::plugin::Info const & plugin, SceneBundle &);

      // constructs a render bundle instance from the ms-delta interpolation
      // value, from 0 to 1. Most likely `accumulatedMs / totalMsPerFrame`.
      // equivalent of pseudo-code `mix(previous, current, msDeltaInterp)`
      RenderBundleInstance Interpolate(
        pul::plugin::Info const & plugin, float const msDeltaInterp
      );
    };
```

Everything is simple enough, but the `pluginBundleData` is where most the
logical operations occur. Since we want plugins to have control over how
rendering is handled, they also are able to store their own data into a render
bundle instance, and also control how that data is interpolated. In the
base-plugin, this primarily means interpolating the animation entities. Some
static stuff like the map do not need this since `cameraOrigin` are more than
enough to render them.

The `Any` implementation looks like this;

```
    namespace pul::util {
      struct Any {
        Any() = default;
        ~Any();
        Any(Any const &) = delete;
        Any(Any &&);

        void (* Deallocate)(void * userdata) = nullptr;

        void * userdata = nullptr;
      };
    }
```

We have an RAII type that wraps a function pointer to a `Dealloc` function. The
c++ std::any solution is complex and overkill for our purposes. The plugin will
know the type it stores, and since the only valid operation on the stored data
outside of the scope of the plugin is to deallocate it, I defer to the
simple/naive solution.

Using a `std::map` and `std::string` to store these probably isn't the best
solution, but at some point I'll switch from strings to hashed strings, and
probably replace all my `std::map` with something like `std::unordered_map`.
The convenience of using both of these right now is that they simplify
interfacing to display information through Dear ImGui.

One benefit of having things this way is that a multi-thread approach to
processing/rendering the game is pretty feasible. Since data is copied over
every logical frame, and then interpolated internally in rendering, the logical
components of the game can be handled in a seperate thread. The only tricky part
will be handling rendering the creation/destruction of specific resources and
sound triggers, though I have an idea of how to approach both of these issues
in the future.

Now we have three plugin functions necessary to apply this interpolation;

```
    void (*UpdateRenderBundleInstance)(
      pul::core::SceneBundle & scene
    , pul::core::RenderBundleInstance & instance
    );

    void (*Interpolate)(
      float const msDeltaInterp
    , pul::core::RenderBundleInstance const & previousBundle
    , pul::core::RenderBundleInstance const & currentBundle
    , pul::core::RenderBundleInstance & outputBundle
    );

    void (*RenderInterpolated)(
      pul::core::SceneBundle const & scene
    , pul::core::RenderBundleInstance const & interpolatedBundle
    );
```

Hopefully in the future, when there might exist mods or other plugins, then this
should provide all the necessary functionality. The loop now looks like:

```
    msToCalculate += deltaMs;
    size_t calculatedFrames = 0ul;
    while (msToCalculate >= sceneBundle.calculatedMsPerFrame) {
      // -- process logic
      ++ calculatedFrames;
      msToCalculate -= sceneBundle.calculatedMsPerFrame;
      ::ProcessLogic(plugin, sceneBundle);

      // -- update render bundle
      renderBundle.Update(plugin, sceneBundle);
    }

    sceneBundle.numCpuFrames = calculatedFrames;

    // -- rendering interpolation
    auto const msDeltaInterp =
      msToCalculate / sceneBundle.calculatedMsPerFrame
    ;
    auto renderBundleInterp = renderBundle.Interpolate(plugin, msDeltaInterp);

    // -- rendering, unlimited Hz
    ::ProcessRendering(
      plugin, sceneBundle
    , renderBundle, renderBundleInterp
    , deltaMs
    , calculatedFrames
    );

    // -- audio, unlimited Hz
    plugin.audio.Update(plugin, sceneBundle);

// ... in ProcessRendering
    sg_begin_pass(pul::gfx::ScenePass(), &(passAction);
    ...
    plugin.RenderInterpolated(scene, renderInterp);
    ...
    sg_end_pass();
```

Now all that has to be done is making my relatively-complex animation system
support interpolation. There are a lot of caveats that I might address at a
future date, such as animation construction/destruction, when to do
flat-interpolation for 2D animation such as flipping, UV coords, etc, but for
now we are just trying to look at rotation and origin interpolation.

At some point I will talk about my animation system, probably after I polish
and clean it up, as it is something I find very unique about developing in
Pulcher. Having a toolset/library built on top of ImGui makes prototyping very
fast & simple. Right now all the animation logic is handled through the base
plugin, but several structs sit in the Pulcher library animation header.

the final piece of the puzzle is describing what should be stored in the
`pul::util::Any::userdata`;

```
    template <typename... T>
    using InterpolantMap = std::unordered_map<size_t, T...>;

    ...

    struct Interpolant {
      pul::animation::Instance instance;
    };

    ...

    struct BaseRenderBundle {
      InterpolantMap<plugin::animation::Interpolant> animationInterpolants;

      std::vector<plugin::animation::Interpolant> animationInterpolantOutputs;

      static void Deallocate(void * data) {
        delete reinterpret_cast<BaseRenderBundle *>(data);
      }
    };
```

On a logical update, all animation instances will be stored in the
InterpolantMap, with their entity ID stored as the key. When doing
interpolation, the previous `animationInterpolants` will be iterated, and an
attempt to find the instance in the current/future interpolant will be made. If
one doesn't exist, then the entity was destroyed at some time in the frame. I
might also in the future make some additional iteration for the current
interpolant, to check for entities created that frame, though if this will be
necessary I'm unsure at this point.

I won't describe the underlying animation system here, I might describe it in a
different blog post though as it is a very nice tool. All that really needs to
be said is that it stores cached matrices for each element it renders, and it
can also emit a buffer of uv-coords/origin vertices after matrices have been
cached.


The `UpdateRenderBundleInstance` looks like
```
    PUL_PLUGIN_DECL void Plugin_UpdateRenderBundleInstance(
      pul::core::SceneBundle & scene
    , pul::core::RenderBundleInstance & instance
    ) {
      auto & registry = scene.EnttRegistry();

      InterpolantMap<plugin::animation::Interpolant> animationInterpolants;

      { // -- store animation information

        auto view = registry.view<pul::animation::ComponentInstance>();
        for (auto entity : view) {
          auto & self = view.get<pul::animation::ComponentInstance>(entity);

          // .. culling

          // copy the entire instance
          auto instance = self.instance;

          // compute cache
          plugin::animation::ComputeCache(
            instance, instance.animator->skeleton, glm::mat3(1.0f), false, 0.0f
          );

          // move instance w/ the entity ID
          animationInterpolants.emplace(
            static_cast<size_t>(entity), std::move(instance)
          );
        }
      }

      { // -- store data into the instance bundle
        auto & instanceBundleDataAny = instance.pluginBundleData["base"];

        if (!instanceBundleDataAny) {
          instanceBundleDataAny = std::make_shared<pul::util::Any>();
          instanceBundleDataAny->Deallocate = ::BaseRenderBundle::Deallocate;
          instanceBundleDataAny->userdata = new ::BaseRenderBundle;
        }

        auto & instanceBundleData =
          *reinterpret_cast<::BaseRenderBundle*>(instanceBundleDataAny->userdata);

        instanceBundleData.animationInterpolants = std::move(animationInterpolants);
      }
    }
```

The `Interpolate` looks like
```
    PUL_PLUGIN_DECL void Plugin_Interpolate(
      float const msDeltaInterp
    , pul::core::RenderBundleInstance const & previousBundle
    , pul::core::RenderBundleInstance const & currentBundle
    , pul::core::RenderBundleInstance & outputBundle
    ) {
      // -- get previous/current bundle
      auto & bundleDataPreviousAny = previousBundle.pluginBundleData.at("base");
      auto & bundleDataCurrentAny  = currentBundle.pluginBundleData.at("base");

      // -- construct output any for this frame
      auto & bundleDataOutputAny = outputBundle.pluginBundleData["base"];
      bundleDataOutputAny = std::make_shared<pul::util::Any>();
      bundleDataOutputAny->Deallocate = ::BaseRenderBundle::Deallocate;
      bundleDataOutputAny->userdata = new ::BaseRenderBundle;

      // -- retrieve baserenderbundle for each
      auto
        & previous =
          *reinterpret_cast<::BaseRenderBundle*>(bundleDataPreviousAny->userdata)
      , & current =
          *reinterpret_cast<::BaseRenderBundle*>(bundleDataCurrentAny->userdata)
      , & output =
          *reinterpret_cast<::BaseRenderBundle*>(bundleDataOutputAny->userdata)
      ;

      // -- forward rendering information
      plugin::animation::Interpolate(
        msDeltaInterp
      , previous.animationInterpolants, current.animationInterpolants
      , output.animationInterpolantOutputs
      );
    }


    ...

    void plugin::animation::Interpolate(
      const float msDeltaInterp
    , InterpolantMap<plugin::animation::Interpolant> const & interpolantsPrev
    , InterpolantMap<plugin::animation::Interpolant> const & interpolantsCurr
    , std::vector<plugin::animation::Interpolant> & interpolantsOut
    ) {
      interpolantsOut.reserve(interpolantsPrev.size());

      for (auto & interpolantPair : interpolantsPrev) {

        auto const interpolantId = std::get<0>(interpolantPair);

        auto const & previous = std::get<1>(interpolantPair).instance;

        // locate current, if it doesn't exist then this object has been destroyed
        auto currentPtr = interpolantsCurr.find(interpolantId);
        if (currentPtr == interpolantsCurr.end()) { continue; }

        auto & current  = std::get<1>(*currentPtr).instance;

        // copy instance
        auto instance = previous;

        // create an interpolated instance to compute vertices from
        instance.origin = glm::mix(previous.origin, current.origin, msDeltaInterp);

        for (auto & piecePair : instance.pieceToState) {
          auto const & label = std::get<0>(piecePair);
          auto & state = std::get<1>(piecePair);
          auto const & statePrev = previous.pieceToState.at(label);
          auto const & stateCurr = current.pieceToState.at(label);

          state.deltaTime =
            glm::mix(statePrev.deltaTime, stateCurr.deltaTime, msDeltaInterp);
          state.angle = glm::mix(statePrev.angle, stateCurr.angle, msDeltaInterp);
          state.flip = stateCurr.flip;
          state.visible = stateCurr.visible;
        }

        // compute vertices
        plugin::animation::ComputeCache(
          instance, instance.animator->skeleton, glm::mat3(1.0f), false, 0.0f
        );

        plugin::animation::ComputeVertices(instance, true);

        // store output to be rendered later
        interpolantsOut.emplace_back(std::move(instance));
      }
    }
```

I should mention that there is one thing I currently do not like with how I am
approaching this; there is no custom allocator. This is a perfect use-case of
such a thing too, as I will need to copy/allocate a lot of information over,
but it will only be used temporarily, some for one logical frame, and others
for just one rendering frame. I could essentially pass this custom allocator to
the plugins during the update/interpolate functions, but I will have to deal
with this at a later date when I overhaul everything to use allocators. For now
I just use heap allocation.

then finally  `RenderInterpolated`

```
    PUL_PLUGIN_DECL void Plugin_RenderInterpolated(
      pul::core::SceneBundle const & scene
    , pul::core::RenderBundleInstance const & interpolatedBundle
    ) {
      // -- get current bundle
      auto & bundleDataCurrentAny = interpolatedBundle.pluginBundleData.at("base");

      // -- retrieve baserenderbundle for each
      auto
        & current =
          *reinterpret_cast<::BaseRenderBundle*>(bundleDataCurrentAny->userdata)
      ;

      // -- forward rendering information
      plugin::animation::RenderInterpolated(
        scene
      , interpolatedBundle
      , current.animationInterpolantOutputs
      );
    }
```

And that's about it! Now it looks like:

[![anim-01](https://img.youtube.com/vi/4zQeoB8U6C4/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4zQeoB8U6C4)
